Our experts answer readers' credit card questions and write unbiased product reviews (here's how we assess credit cards). In some cases, we receive a commission from our partners; however, our opinions are our own. Terms apply to offers listed on this page.

Revenued Business Card 3 /5 A five pointed star A five pointed star A five pointed star A five pointed star A five pointed star 3 out of 5 Stars Intro offer $500 cash back after you spend $5,000 in eligible purchases on the card within your first 3 months from account opening Rewards Earn 3% cash back on every card swipe with no category restrictions. $0 Annual Fee View Full Details Apply now

Revenued Business Card 3 /5 A five pointed star A five pointed star A five pointed star A five pointed star A five pointed star 3 out of 5 Stars Intro offer $500 cash back after you spend $5,000 in eligible purchases on the card within your first 3 months from account opening Rewards Earn 3% cash back on every card swipe with no category restrictions. $0 Annual Fee View Full Details $0 Annual Fee Apply now On Revenued's website

Revenued Business Card Apply now On Revenued's website Details Rewards Earn 3% cash back on every card swipe with no category restrictions. Annual Fee $0 Intro offer $500 cash back after you spend $5,000 in eligible purchases on the card within your first 3 months from account opening Recommended Credit Bad to Fair Regular Annual Percentage Rate (APR) N/A Intro Annual Percentage Rate (APR) Factor based Editor's Rating 3 /5 A five pointed star A five pointed star A five pointed star A five pointed star A five pointed star 3 out of 5 Stars Pros & Cons Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options. Pros Check mark icon A check mark. It indicates a confirmation of your intended interaction. No annual fee Check mark icon A check mark. It indicates a confirmation of your intended interaction. 3% cash back on all purchases Check mark icon A check mark. It indicates a confirmation of your intended interaction. No credit history required for approval Cons Dash icon A dash. It often indicates an interaction to shrink a section. Unavoidable interest charges Dash icon A dash. It often indicates an interaction to shrink a section. No real ongoing benefits Dash icon A dash. It often indicates an interaction to shrink a section. Sole proprietors are ineligible Highlights Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options. More Information Earn $500 cash back after you spend $5,000 in eligible purchases on the Card within your first 3 months of Card Membership.

Earn 3% cashback on every single card purchase. All categories apply.

The card that cares less about your credit score and more about your business.

Includes the Revenued Flex Line.

A flexible line and business card bundled in one.

No application, annual, or draw fee.

Terms apply.

Spending limit determined by cash flow of your business and other factors. Additional Reading Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options. Read our review Read Our Review A looong arrow, pointing right

The Revenued Business Card is a no-annual-fee business card that will consider approving you according to your business income (instead of your credit score). It's great for those with low credit scores — but it will do no good in helping you build credit, as the card won't show up on your personal credit report.

The card has a large bonus and a flat 3% return rate everywhere — but take caution before you apply. This card's mandatory "factor rate" fees can be a deal breaker.

Review: Is the Revenued Business Card the best card for you?

The Revenued Business Card has a handful of characteristics that (for better or worse) make it unique within the credit card world. This card competes with credit cards, but it's actually not one itself. It gives you a flex line of sorts for a portion of your future revenue.

Most notably, the card is similar to the X1 Card in that it prioritizes your income instead of your credit score when deciding if you're a good candidate. This means that, so long as your business revenue is respectable, you could be eligible for the Revenued Business Card even if your credit score isn't great. Your credit will not receive a hard inquiry when you apply.

This is an excellent card feature — those with a lower credit score often have difficulty being approved for small-business credit cards from other banks. If you're desperate for business funding and your credit is in a state that prevents you from opening a proper small business card, you might give this a look (though we recommend you consider it a last resort — we'll explain why.).

This card earns 3% cash back on all purchases — and it comes with a welcome bonus of $500 cash back after you spend $5,000 in eligible purchases on the card within your first 3 months from account opening.

However, this card also comes with some serious deterrents:

Your business will need to gross a minimum of $10,000 per month to qualify

You'll need a business bank account with a minimum average daily balance of $1,000 per day

Sole proprietors don't qualify

Your company must have been operating for at least six months

In other words, it's not good for those who have a moderately profitable side gig.

Now for the worst part: Though you won't be charged an annual fee, the Revenued Business Card incurs unavoidable interest charges. You'll pay between 10% and 50% in fees on the charges you make — regardless of how quickly you pay off your balance. That's the tradeoff you'll have to endure for such a relaxed application approval process.

If you've got a credit score above 700, we suggest you apply for other small-business cards, such as the $0-annual-fee Ink Business Cash® credit card. It comes with solid earning rates and an enormous welcome offer of $900 bonus cash back after you spend $6,000 on purchases in the first three months from account opening. Plus, you're guaranteed to pay no interest if you pay off your bill in full each month.

Let's examine the Revenued Business Card more closely to see if this is a card you should consider.

Insider's Featured Small Business Cards Ink Business Unlimited® Credit Card

Ink Business Cash® Credit Card Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options. Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options. Rewards Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options. Earn unlimited 1.5% cash back on every purchase made for your business. Intro Offer Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options. $900 bonus cash back after you spend $6,000 on purchases in the first three months from account opening Annual Fee Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options. $0 Rewards Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options. Earn 5% cash back on the first $25,000 spent in combined purchases at office supply stores and on internet, cable and phone services each account anniversary year. Earn 2% cash back on the first $25,000 spent in combined purchases at gas stations and restaurants each account anniversary year. Earn 1% cash back on all other purchases. Intro Offer Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options. $900 bonus cash back after you spend $6,000 on purchases in the first three months from account opening Annual Fee Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options. $0 Apply now On Chase's website Apply now On Chase's website

We're focused here on the rewards and perks that come with each card. These cards won't be worth it if you're paying interest or late fees. When using a credit card, it's important to pay your balance in full each month, make payments on time, and only spend what you can afford to pay.

How to earn rewards from the Revenued Business Card

For those with a less-than-stellar credit score, finding a small business card that earns any meaningful amount of rewards is nearly impossible. The Revenued Business Card bucks this trend.

The card comes with $500 cash back after you spend $5,000 in eligible purchases on the card within your first 3 months from account opening. That's a healthy bonus for a card with a $0 annual fee.

To boot, you'll earn a flat 3% cash back on all purchases. That's well above average for a no-annual-fee cash-back credit card (though, as we'll see later, it's not quite as good as it sounds for most cardholders).

How to use rewards

The rewards you earn with the Revenued Business Card are straight cash. It's simple to redeem, because you can use it for anything. There are no complicated strategies to learn, as is sometimes the case in the world of travel rewards. If you want to use it to lower your card balance, for rent, or any other of life's trivial expenses, it's easy to do.

Cash back collects in your account and can be redeemed once you've earned at least $10. It'll direct deposit into the bank account you've linked to your card.

Revenued Business Card benefits and features

This card doesn't promote a long list of features. Its appeal lies almost exclusively in the fact that it can be opened by those with bad credit.

Flexible credit line

The amount of money you're able to spend (called your Flex Line) on the Revenued Business Card changes according to factors such as your income, business account savings, debt, etc. You can be approved for up to $100,000.

'Factor rate' fees instead of APR

Hear me out. Depending on your situation, this can be a benefit.

The Revenued Business Card charges you based on "factor rate" instead of interest for a hanging balance. We'll show you how to calculate these below, but just know that you could be charged between 10% and 50% of your total bill — no matter how quickly you pay off your balance. That's a nightmarish thought for anyone who pays their credit card balance each month and never has to worry about interest fees.

However, if you plan to make a purchase that you can't pay off in the near future, factor rates could actually work in your favor — provided you receive a rate closer to 10%. Here's why.

Most rewards credit cards have interest rates exceeding 20%. That means:

If you were to spend $1,000 on a card that enforces a 20% APR, you could pay off your card in 18 months by making $65 monthly payments. You'd be charged $166 in fees.

If you were to spend $1,000 on the Revenued Business Card with a factor rate of 10%, an 18-month payoff plan would result in just $100 in fees.

If you're the kind of company that will pay things off quickly, the Revenued Business Card is probably not for you.

Revenued Business Card 3 /5 A five pointed star A five pointed star A five pointed star A five pointed star A five pointed star 3 out of 5 Stars Intro offer $500 cash back after you spend $5,000 in eligible purchases on the card within your first 3 months from account opening Rewards Earn 3% cash back on every card swipe with no category restrictions. $0 Annual Fee View Full Details Apply now

Revenued Business Card 3 /5 A five pointed star A five pointed star A five pointed star A five pointed star A five pointed star 3 out of 5 Stars Intro offer $500 cash back after you spend $5,000 in eligible purchases on the card within your first 3 months from account opening Rewards Earn 3% cash back on every card swipe with no category restrictions. $0 Annual Fee View Full Details $0 Annual Fee Apply now On Revenued's website

Revenued Business Card Apply now On Revenued's website Details Rewards Earn 3% cash back on every card swipe with no category restrictions. Annual Fee $0 Intro offer $500 cash back after you spend $5,000 in eligible purchases on the card within your first 3 months from account opening Recommended Credit Bad to Fair Regular Annual Percentage Rate (APR) N/A Intro Annual Percentage Rate (APR) Factor based Editor's Rating 3 /5 A five pointed star A five pointed star A five pointed star A five pointed star A five pointed star 3 out of 5 Stars Pros & Cons Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options. Pros Check mark icon A check mark. It indicates a confirmation of your intended interaction. No annual fee Check mark icon A check mark. It indicates a confirmation of your intended interaction. 3% cash back on all purchases Check mark icon A check mark. It indicates a confirmation of your intended interaction. No credit history required for approval Cons Dash icon A dash. It often indicates an interaction to shrink a section. Unavoidable interest charges Dash icon A dash. It often indicates an interaction to shrink a section. No real ongoing benefits Dash icon A dash. It often indicates an interaction to shrink a section. Sole proprietors are ineligible Highlights Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options. More Information Earn $500 cash back after you spend $5,000 in eligible purchases on the Card within your first 3 months of Card Membership.

Earn 3% cashback on every single card purchase. All categories apply.

The card that cares less about your credit score and more about your business.

Includes the Revenued Flex Line.

A flexible line and business card bundled in one.

No application, annual, or draw fee.

Terms apply.

Spending limit determined by cash flow of your business and other factors. Additional Reading Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options. Read our review Read Our Review A looong arrow, pointing right

Fees and costs

The Revenued Business Card charges a $0 annual fee. It also does not have any monthly fees. The card does not charge foreign transaction fees — but that's because you can only use it domestically.

This card doesn't charge interest for your balance, but instead a factor rate. Factor rates tend to be between 1.1 and 1.5. Every time you use your card, you will be subject to whatever factor rate Revenued has given you.

To determine how much you'll pay in fees, simply multiply your payment amount by your factor rate. For example, if you spend $2,000 and your factor rate is 1.1, you're guaranteed to pay $2,200 — that's $200 in fees ($2,000 x 1.1). When you make a purchase, you will immediately owe whatever percentage your factor rate dictates.

The 3% cash back does its part to mitigate these fees slightly — but just know that you're never going to come out ahead.

Compare Revenued Business Card vs other no-annual-fee cash-back business cards

Revenued Business Card Ink Business Cash® Credit Card American Express Blue Business Cash™ Card Annual fee $0 $0 $0 Rewards rate 3% cash back on all purchases 5% cash back (5x points) at office supply stores and on internet, cable, and phone services*** 2% cash back (2x points) at gas stations and restaurants*** 1% cash back (1x points) on all other purchases 2% cash back on the first $50,000 spent on eligible purchases each year, then 1% (cash back is received in the form of a statement credit) Welcome bonus offer $500 cash back after you spend $5,000 in eligible purchases on the card within your first 3 months from account opening $900 bonus cash back after you spend $6,000 on purchases in the first three months from account opening $250 statement credit after you spend $3,000 in purchases on your card in your first 3 months Card benefits N/A Primary car rental insurance (when renting for business purposes) Extended warranty Purchase protection Travel and emergency assistance services Roadside dispatch 0% intro APR on purchases for the first 12 months, then a 17.49% - 23.49% Variable Extended warranty Purchase protection Secondary car rental insurance Global Assist Hotline Discounts and bonuses through Amex Offers** 0% intro APR on purchases for 12 months from account opening, then a 17.74% - 25.74% Variable Review Chase Ink Business Cash card review Amex Blue Business Cash card review

Revenued Business card vs other business cards for lower credit scores

Revenued Business Card Capital One®️ Spark®️ Classic for Business Brex Card Annual fee $0 $0 $0 Rewards rate 3% cash back on all purchases 5% cash back on hotels and rental cars booked through Capital One Travel 1% cash back on all other purchases Up to: 8x on ride-sharing 5x on travel 4x on restaurants 3x on eligible Apple purchases 1.5x on advertising 1x on everything else Welcome bonus offer $500 cash back after you spend $5,000 in eligible purchases on the card within your first 3 months from account opening N/A 50,000 signup bonus points after spending $9,000+ in the first 30 days Card benefits N/A Extended warranty Roadside dispatch No foreign transaction fees Secondary car rental insurance Cell phone protection Exclusive hotel perks via Mastercard's Luxury Hotel Program Discounts on QuickBooks, Gusto, and other software Brex Credit Card review

Revenued Business Card frequently asked questions (FAQ)

Is the Revenued Business Card a credit card? Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options. Interestingly, the Revenued Business Card is a hybrid flexible spending line and prepaid card. It provides a flex line to you in return for a fee based on your projected future revenue. Because of this, the card does not report to your credit history.

What credit score do you need to be approved for the Revenued Business Card? Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options. You don't even need a credit score to be approved for the Revenued Business Card. Revenued looks at your business income when deciding to approve you — not your credit.

Who is eligible for the Revenued Business card? Chevron icon It indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options. If you own a business (not a sole-proprietorship) that grosses at least $10,000 per month, you may qualify for this card. However, you'll also need to have been in business for at least six months. You'll also need a business bank account with an average minimum daily balance of at least $1,000 — and you must never have more than three days of negative bank balance.