Title:
What Are Blue Lies and Why Do People Tell Them?

Article Text:
It seems that almost everyone lies. In my research, 95 percent of people report lying in any given week.

Some of those untruths are white lies—small dishonest statements usually told to avoid social awkwardness or to benefit another. Some are more self-serving or selfish lies, aimed at covering one’s misdeeds or gaining some advantage. These are referred to as black lies. But there is a third category of lies that fits neither of those categories: blue lies.

Blue lies are lies told to benefit the group or collective to which one belongs or to undermine the group’s adversaries. They are a sign of allegiance to the social groups to which we belong (Barnes, 1994).

The term "blue lies" was coined to describe lies that police officers told to protect others in the law enforcement community. Lying to protect another officer from punishment was viewed within that community as a morally appropriate defense against outsiders (Barnes, 1994; Bok 1978).

But blue lies are not just the province of police officers. Organized crime families, for example, also see blue lying as a primary virtue, whereas honesty about the group’s activities is seen as a corrupt betrayal.

Lying to Support and Protect the Group

When we belong to a group—whether it is a family, a sports team, or a nation—we often take on a moral imperative to support and defend that group, even in selfless ways. Group members are championed when they show dedication and loyalty to the group. For example, a parent who works three jobs to support their kin is seen as a paragon.

People are honored for placing themselves in danger for the benefit of the group, too. For instance, a firefighter who rushes into a burning building to save their comrades is held up as the epitome of honor. Likewise, group members who vanquish competing groups are seen as virtuous. The fighter aces of World War II were lauded as heroes for each enemy they killed.

Another way people protect, support, and defend their group is by lying.

Blue Lies and Politics

When others lie to us, we tend to view it as an ethically reprehensible violation. But in a twist of moral hypocrisy, if someone lies for our benefit, we often see it as virtuous.

Warfare provides a perfect example. When people in the United States discovered that Vladimir Putin had lied about his intentions to invade Ukraine, they were revolted by his utter dishonesty. However, many people in the United States celebrated American spies who used deceit to one-up the Russians during the Cold War. Judgments about whether lying is immoral or virtuous depend on who is being duped.

It is not just other nations that are viewed as the enemy. Stark political divisions in the United States have people seeing their fellow citizens in opposing political parties as enemies.

As a consequence, lying in ways that support one’s political group or lying in ways that harm opposing groups is often seen as morally justified or righteous (Smith 2017). One study found that when people lie for their own group, they are viewed as more trustworthy within that group, not less (Levine & Schweitzer, 2015). Lying, it seems, can strengthen bonds.

Group membership can be thought of as the backdrop against which we consider the ethics of lying. Our moral positions on lying take form when we consider who is being affected by the lie. Lies that support us and those we see as good and right are fine. Lies that harm those on the other side—our evil opponents—are acceptable as well.

Blue lies show fellow group members that one is cooperative, loyal, and trustworthy. For that reason, blue liars are embraced.