The Arena Football League (AFL) is relaunching under new leadership and plans to resume play in 2024, Insider has learned.

Lee A. Hutton III, the new AFL commissioner, will become the first Black commissioner of a professional sports league in the US.

Top editors give you the stories you want — delivered right to your inbox each weekday. Loading Something is loading. Thanks for signing up! Access your favorite topics in a personalized feed while you're on the go. download the app Email address By clicking ‘Sign up’, you agree to receive marketing emails from Insider as well as other partner offers and accept our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy

On Wednesday, the Arena Football League (AFL) will announce that it is relaunching under new leadership with plans to resume play in 2024, Insider has learned.

The league will resume operations under the investment group F1 Sports & Entertainment, which bought the rights to the AFL in January 2022. The AFL ceased operations in 2019 after filing for Chapter 7 bankruptcy.

The league's new board of directors will include chairman Chris Chetty, president Anthony Rossi as president, and president of operations Shan Singh, Insider has learned. Its executive leadership team will be led by commissioner Lee A. Hutton III, deputy commissioner Travelle Gaines, president of entertainment Tuo Clark, and executive vice president Curt Feldtkeller.

In assuming his role as the new AFL commissioner, Hutton will become the first Black commissioner to lead a professional sports league in the United States. Per a representative for the league, Hutton has "served as an attorney that has represented both Fortune 500 companies as well as athletes, celebrities and artists in contract negotiations," and over the course of his career, has "worked on high-profile cases, ranging from NFL concussion litigation to NCAA NIL legal cases."

"The Arena Football League brand has always sat at the promontory of indoor football by offering gridiron entertainment, fast action, and iron tough athletes in conjunction with delivering a family fun fan experience that uniquely engages the pig skin enthusiast," Hutton said in a statement to Insider. "Ultimately, the professional sports brand speaks for itself and is proud to announce, 'We are back!'"

AFL commissioner Lee A. Hutton III. AFL

"We are elated to come out of hibernation and make this announcement official," Rossi said. "Our objective when we acquired the AFL was to bring back a storied brand that deserved to be revived and showcased again, globally. We envisioned executing on the old saying 'Bigger and Better,' but this time, we want to incorporate the components of a modern-day business – streaming, betting, technology, virtual reality, and immerse fan engagement mixed with good old-fashioned iron-man football. The re-launch of the AFL first started with assembling a respected executive and advisory team. Each partner, member and business executive of today's AFL was meticulously hand-selected piece by piece. We believe we have assembled a world-class, operational team made up of C-Suite executives, expert sports trainers, football personnel, performance facilities, legal partners, professional team owners and former athletes."

The AFL will launch with 16 teams that will play 10 regular season games before postseason play.

"Our commitment is to deliver a professional sports event every week indoors, on the shoulder of the summer season when the world craves entertainment and competition," Chetty said. "We aim to produce a family-friendly, yet equally electric atmosphere for our committed fans. As Chairman, my objective will be to change the culture of professional sports ownership and it is with great confidence that I state – from the owners to the players – we will be the most racially-diverse professional sports league in the world."

"The AFL has an iconic legacy of 30-plus years and we plan to honor that history," Gaines said. "We will bring teams to markets that previously boasted AFL franchises and engage with the rabid fanbases that supported our brand of football. The AFL also plans to provide year-round, sports performance training, rehabilitation resources and nutritional programs to ensure the modern athlete is better prepared for ironman football."