06.15 EST BoE official says Brexit productivity penalty is £1,000 per household

Back in the UK, a Bank of England policy maker has warned that a wave of business investment was “stopped in its tracks” by the Brexit vote nearly seven years ago.

Jonathan Haskel, an external member of the Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee, said an interview with The Overshoot that business investment had “basically flattened out” after the 2016 referendum.

That drop in business investment growth, the Bank has calculated, has created a productivity penalty of about 1.3% of GDP.

This is based on what would have happened if investment carried on growing at the pre-referendum rate.

Haskel explained to the Overshoot:

That 1.3% of GDP is about £29 billion, or roughly £1000 per household. At the end of the forecast period, the penalty goes up to something like 2.8% of GDP, which is very close to the 3.2% number we found using the totally different reduced form methodology based on goods trade volumes.

This is a timely point, after The Observer reported that a cross-party summit bringing together leading leavers and remainers has been held, to try to address and remedy the failings of Brexit.

This has prompted Lord Frost, the UK’s former chief Brexit negotiator, to urge ministers to “fully and enthusiastically embrace the advantages of Brexit”. Frost claims the meeting is part of a plot to unravel the deal he negotiated.

Haskel, though, insists that the UK’s productivity slowdown “goes back to Brexit”.

Asked why the UK has had a more severe productivity slowdown than other countries since the financial crisis, he says this is partly due to the country’s large financial sector.

But, Haskel adds:

If you look in the period up to 2016, it’s true that we had a bigger slowdown in productivity up to 2016, but we had a lot of investment. We had a big boom between 2012-ish to 2016. But then investment just plateaued from 2016, and we dropped to the bottom of G7 countries.

Haskel also suggests that delays in the NHS are responsible for the rise in economic inactivity, as more people leave the labour force.

He says:

There are basically two competing hypotheses here in the U.K. One is that actually lots of people have just retired. They were not active before and they’ve decided to give it up and just retire. Um, that’s hypothesis one. Hypothesis two is, is related to ill health. The National Health Service here has had very long waiting lists. It’s proved to be very, very difficult for a very overstretched health service to deal with Covid and deal with the aftermath. We are finding some weak correlations between regional increases in inactivity and regional increases in self-reported ill health within the U.K.

You can read the full interview here: