From 7d ago 02.30 EST Jeremy Hunt says economy is more resilient than feared Chancellor Jeremy Hunt says has warned that the UK economy is not out of the woods, after narrowly swerving a recession in the last quarter. Hunt says the economy is showing more resilience than expected, pointing out that the UK’s 4% growth during 2022 is faster than other advaned economies. He says: “The fact the UK was the fastest growing economy in the G7 last year, as well as avoiding a recession, shows our economy is more resilient than many feared. “However, we are not out the woods yet, particularly when it comes to inflation.” UK GDP report Photograph: ONS

Updated at 03.21 EST

6d ago 10.11 EST Labour’s shadow chancallor, Rachel Reeves, has ured the government to wake up to the problems in the economy. Speaking to broadcasters during a visit in Bolton, Reeves said: “I hope today’s numbers are a wake-up call to the Government because the economy now is just flatlining along the bottom. “We’re the only major G7 economy that is still smaller than it was before the pandemic – and zero growth is not a success. “The Government now urgently need to put in place a real plan for economic growth, as well as tackling the cost-of-living crisis that is affecting so many families and pensioners right now.”



6d ago 09.38 EST Wall Street has opened in the red, following losses in Europe and Asia already today. The S&P 500 index of US shares has dipped by 0.15%, or 6 points, to 4,075 at the open. The jump in the oil price today, after Russia announced it will cut production, has fuelled concerns of a downturn this year. The US bond market is flashing warning signs. The yield, or interest rate, on 10-year American government debt has fallen below the equivalent yield on the two-year bonds. That ‘inversion’ can be a sign that markets are pricing in a recession, as you’d normally expect the 10-year bond to yield more (to reflect the greater risk of lending for 10 years). The 2-10s U.S. yield curve is now the most inverted since the early 1980s. https://t.co/bXWfLKEipk pic.twitter.com/ztMTM7yuYv — Lisa Abramowicz (@lisaabramowicz1) February 9, 2023 The 2s/10s yield curve has now inverted to over -80 bps. Last time here? Try April 1981. And the double-dip recession was three months away. Different this time? Bloomberg recession model now at 100% for 2023, so I somehow doubt it.#RosenbergResearch — David Rosenberg (@EconguyRosie) February 10, 2023 Stephen Innes, managing partner at SPI Asset Management, says: Investors are getting a lot testier as the market favourite US recession lead indicator, 2’s 10’s, is flashing danger ahead for the US economy. In London, the FTSE 100 index is now down 40 points, or 0.5%, at 7870, away from its record highs earlier this week. Innes says: European equities are trading definitively lower today as markets absorb the notion that rates may stay higher for longer and more thoroughly. We also got a weak GDP report out of the UK -- contracting more than consensus expectations in December by 0.5% mom, driven entirely by a decline in services activity and provided a rude wake-up call to FTSE bulls.



6d ago 08.22 EST Over in Moscow, the head of Russia’s central bank has said that the risks of a global recession have decreased. Russian central bank governor Elvira Nabiullina told a press conerence that the Bank had improved its forecasts for Russia’s economy this year. It now believes growth will fall beween -1% and +1% in 2023. Speaking after the Bank of Russia left interest rates unchanged at 7.5% today, Nabiullina said: The opening of China’s economy after the removal of COVID-19 restrictions, the fact that central banks in advanced economies are close to the peak of their interest rate increases, falls in energy prices, primarily in Europe - all of this has a positive effect on developing economies, including Russia’s key trade partners. However, the positive effects of this for Russia will be restrained by sanctions.” Bloomberg reported this week that president Putin’s government has been pressuring Russia’s Central Bank to be “more upbeat” about the country’s economy amid the invasion of Ukraine and international sanctions.



6d ago 08.13 EST Kalyeena Makortoff The National Crime Agency has delivered what is likely to be disappointing news for campaigners who have alleged that UK banks took part in “industrial-scale forgery”, by faking customer signatures on loan and mortgage agreements to repossess homes and recover debts. The NCA launched an investigation on the request of the Treasury Select Committee back in July 2019, to review claims by the Bank Signature Forgery Campaign (BSFC). After two and a half years, the NCA has told MPs that it found no evidence of a conspiracy or organised criminal racket by lenders: It says: “After careful and thorough examination we have not found evidence of serious or organised crime, or conspiracy to commit fraud or forgery offences that warrant further review and investigation, so will not be taking any further action in relation to these allegations of bank misconduct. “The breakdown of the material does not support the central allegations made by the BSFC, nor does the material identify dishonest intent and gain by UK financial institutions. We know this will come as a disappointment to many of the individuals who have taken the time to share their material with the BSFC.” However, the NCA letter suggests it may have found cases where signatures were potentially reproduced, though it appears to claim this was for” administrative” purposes. While the FCA found “instances where firms had issued communications to customers that had been signed with the same digital signature attributed to different teams and staff” there were no suggestions the practice was ongoing: The NCA says: “Although we find that the material supplied suggests that, to the extent that discrepancies have been identified, signatures were being used for administrative convenience rather than to commit any criminal offence, we do believe the BSFC material highlights matters relating to signatures that need to be addressed.” Now, the NCA is calling for a new policy over how banks use digital signatures on loans and mortgages. “The National Economic Crime Centre will be recommending to partners that a transparent policy position be put in place with regard to the use of digital signatures on customer facing correspondence originating from the banks and their representatives. This should be supported with clear advice available to customers about who to contact if they have queries or complaints in relations to these signatures.” Are banks guilty of faking signatures on British court papers? Read more



7d ago 08.00 EST The UK’s economic performance has been ‘calamitous’, despite avoiding two quarterly contractions in a row, says Sam Tombs of Pantheon Economics. Here’s why: No recession on the pedantic definition of two consecutive quarters of falling GDP, but a calamitous performance nonetheless. The U.K. still is the *only* G7 country in which GDP has not exceeded its pre-Covid peak yet: pic.twitter.com/gBnbJrAuVt — Samuel Tombs (@samueltombs) February 10, 2023 The Queen's funeral in September and the rollout of Covid booster jabs have boosted quarter-on-quarter GDP growth in Q4.



I calculate that "private-sector GDP" in Q4 was 0.3% below its average level in the first two months of Q3. This is a recession in all but name. — Samuel Tombs (@samueltombs) February 10, 2023



7d ago 07.53 EST Analysis: UK can expect year of stagnation after narrowest of escapes from recession Phillip Inman It was a recession in all but name: that is the conclusion of many economists who argue that while the official data shows the UK economy stood still in the last three months of 2022 rather than contracting, it is still in bad shape, my colleague Phillip Inman writes. To be precise, the economy actually expanded by 0.01% in the fourth quarter, an increase so statistically insignificant that it is rounded down to zero. Had Britain not added just £77m to its £2.2tn gross domestic product (GDP) then it would have fallen into a technical recession, characterised by two consecutive quarters of negative growth. Stagnation is not a good look when there is so much that needs to happen – investment in green infrastructure, for instance – to improve living standards and meet net zero targets. Here’s the full piece: UK can expect year of stagnation after narrowest of escapes from recession Read more

Updated at 07.54 EST

7d ago 07.52 EST UK escaped recession by £77m Britain’s economy really did come close to dropping into recession in the final quarter of last year. In the end, UK output in Q4 was just £77m away from a contraction, Paul Dales of Capital Economics says. But, Dales also predicts high inflation and high interest rates will trigger a recession this year. Strikes on the trains, in the NHS and at Royal Mail hit the economy, he points out: Health output fell by 2.8% m/m, partly due to fewer GDP appointments during the strikes, transport output was down by 3.1% m/m and arts/entertainment fell by 7.8% m/m (some of which was due to the absence of Premier League football due to the World Cup). But some of the weakening from the +0.1% m/m rise in GDP in November was probably due to some underlying weakness as a result of high inflation and high interest rates.



7d ago 07.23 EST NIESR: It still feels like a recession to most households. This morning’s news that Britain dodged a recession at the end of last year will be “little consolation to most households”, which have seen significant hits to their real incomes over the course of the last year. So says the NIERS thinktank, which predicts today that the economy will shrink by 0.2% in January-March. Paula Bejarano Carbo, associate economist at NIESR, explains: “Today’s ONS figures suggest that monthly GDP fell by 0.5 per cent in December, driven by a 0.8 per cent fall in services which saw significant decreases in human health and social work activities resulting from strikes and a drop-off in vaccination activity. Interestingly, monthly output in consumer-facing services fell by 1.2 per cent in December following growth of 0.4 per cent in November; the ONS associates this surprise with the gains to food and beverage activity from the FIFA World Cup being overtaken by a 17 per cent loss in sports activities, and amusement and recreation activities due to the break in the Premier League. The monthly data suggest that GDP was flat in the fourth quarter of 2022. While this means that the UK avoided a technical recession in 2022 – that is, two consecutive quarters of contracting growth – it is important to remember that it will have felt like a recession for most households as the cost-of-living crisis eroded living standards in the UK.” ⚡️OUT NOW⚡️ Our latest monthly #GDP Tracker suggests little relief expected for #households with GDP set to contract by 0.2% in the first quarter of 2023 ⚠️



Read our analysis in full here 📊👇👇#EconTwitter #UKeconomy#CostOfLivingCrisishttps://t.co/RZEq2A7TWU pic.twitter.com/8tfB1otOSL — National Institute of Economic and Social Research (@NIESRorg) February 10, 2023



7d ago 07.16 EST The government’s energy price guarantee, which capped the unit cost of electricity and gas for households, probably helped the UK avoid falling into recession last quarter. Investec analyst Philip Shaw points out that household consumption eked out a 0.1% gain in real terms in the final quarter of 2022. The Energy Price Guarantee was “undoubtedly” a major support over the period, Shaw explains: In the event, domestic gas and electricity prices rose by 27%. Without the EPG, the increase would actually have been 80%, which would have very probably resulted in a significant fall in consumer spending. The EPG was announced by Liz Truss in September, and meant that typical household bills would rise by about £2,500 a year. Before that, they were on track to jump to £3,549 (although there was no limit on what a customer could pay). Shaw adds: Another point of interest was the 4.8% increase on the quarter in business investment, maintaining its upward trend over the year as a whole, most likely aided by the ‘super deduction’ capital allowances.



7d ago 06.40 EST Modupe Adegbembo, G7 Economist at AXA Investment Managers, predicts the UK economy will contract in the current quarter. That would mean nine months without growth. Following today’s GDP report, showing the economy flatlined in Q4 but shrank 0.5% in December, Adegbembo says: The UK economy has narrowly avoided falling into a technical recession in 2022 based on the first quarterly estimate, but growth momentum remains weak, and we expect Q1 growth of -0.3%….. We don’t think this quarter’s stagnation is a precursor of an upcoming pickup in growth momentum; the UK economy remains weak as evidenced by recent deterioration consumer surveys and subdued business surveys, and we expect to see the economy decline further into 2023.



7d ago 06.10 EST UK consumer confidence has picked up as people show more optimism about their household finances, polling firm YouGov has reported. It latest survey of the public has found that optimism rose in January, suggesting the economy performed better than feared in the early weeks of 2023. UK consumer confidence Photograph: YouGov The report says: Consumer confidence increased by 2.4 points in January 2023, which is the biggest single month increase since May 2021 Short-term (+5.7) and forward-looking (+10.5) household finance measures saw significant improvements



House value measures for the past 30 days (+3.7) and next 12 months (+5.8) also trended upwards



Business activity measures for the past 30 days fell by -2.2 points to 106.6, the lowest since February 2021



Confidence in job security fell further by 0.7 points



7d ago 05.49 EST Oil price jumps as Russia announces output cut There’s drama in the energy markets this morning. The oil price has jumped by 2.5%, after Moscow announced it will cut oil production, in retaliate against Western sanctions following the invasion of Ukraine. Russia will cut oil production by 500,000 barrels per day, or around 5% of output, in March, Deputy Prime Minister Alexander Novak has announced. The move has been hinted at by the Kremlin, since the European Union and G-7 began discussing capping the price of Russian exports. At the end of December, president Putin banned the supply of crude oil and oil products to nations that impose the cap. Novak says “As of today, we are fully selling the entire volume of oil produced, however, as stated earlier, we will not sell oil to those who directly or indirectly adhere to the principles of the ‘price cap’. “In this regard, Russia will voluntarily reduce production by 500,000 barrels per day in March. This will contribute to the restoration of market relations.” This has pushed Brent crude up by $2 per barrel, to $86.60. That’s the highest since the end of January. Higher energy prices could undermine hopes of bringing inflation down sharply this year. Russia will cut about 5% of its monthly oil output in March in response to the price cap.



This is 0.5% of the world supply.



Brent crude up 2.5%



Things continue to move quickly... — Gold Telegraph ⚡ (@GoldTelegraph_) February 10, 2023

