In 2019, Daniel Motaung moved from South Africa to Nairobi, Kenya, for a job at an outsourcing company called Sama. He had been hired for his Zulu language skills, but was unsure of exactly the kind of work he’d be performing. It was only after he started working, he claims, that Motaung discovered he would be spending eight hours or more a day looking at some of the most hideous content on the internet—beheadings, child abuse, suicides—as an outsourced content moderator for Meta.

Motaung alleges that he was paid as low as $2.20 an hour to view graphic content that left him with PTSD. He describes it as “emotionally and mentally devastating”: “I went in OK and went out not OK,” Motaung said in a statement shared by the Real Facebook Oversight Board, a group of independent civil rights advocates and experts. “It changed the person I was.” Motaung began to push to form a union that would allow the moderators to advocate for better pay and more support for their taxing work. Just six months into the job, he was fired. So he decided to sue his former employer and Meta.

Despite Meta’s months-long effort to have it dismissed, on February 6, the Kenyan Employment and Labour Relations Court ruled that Motaung’s case against the social media company can move forward, meaning that Meta can be held accountable for the psychological damage and labor violations faced by Motaung and other outsourced content moderators.

Justice Jacob Gakeri ruled that Meta “shall not be struck” from the case, according to Kenyan news site Business Daily, opening the company up to its first substantial labor challenge outside the US.

As of 2020, it was estimated that Meta had some 15,000 moderators spread across the world through outsourcing companies. In Kenya, Meta’s outsourcing partner was Sama, though its contract with the company will end in March of this year. Should the case succeed, it could allow other large tech companies that outsource to Kenya to be held accountable for the way staff there are treated, and provide a framework for people in other countries seeking to challenge tech giants.

The case, filed by UK-based nonprofit Foxglove Legal and the Kenyan law firm Nzili and Sumbi Advocates on behalf of Motaung, alleges that the working conditions violate Kenyan law and constitute, among other things, forced labor and human trafficking because workers were “coerced by a threat of penalty to accept the unlawful circumstances they found themselves in.”