But the company’s vision supported the UK government’s narrative of “leveling up”—supporting the development of struggling, often postindustrial, areas of the country.

Britishvolt’s factory in the northeast promised to create 3,000 new jobs, with another 5,000 in its supply chain. Announcing that the government would provide the company with funding in 2022, then-prime minister Boris Johnson called the facility “a strong testament to the skilled workers of the North East and the UK’s place at the helm of the global green industrial revolution.”

That government support was enough for car manufacturers like Lotus and Aston Martin to sign memorandums of understanding with Britishvolt in January and March 2022, to build the batteries that would go into their electric vehicles. It also brought in investment from industry: Large companies plowed cash into Britishvolt over successive funding rounds, investing an estimated £200 million, and promised more if the company met certain targets.

Najdari and Carlstrom stepped down in August 2022, after it emerged that Carlstrom had a conviction for tax fraud in Sweden. They were replaced by former Ford executive Graham Hoare, who became president of global operations.

By then, things were starting to falter. The company had built up a £3 million a month payroll and, in October, it announced it needed £200 million in emergency funding to tide it over until the summer of 2023, when it expected to receive its first orders from vehicle manufacturers. The UK government, which had promised £100 million once Britishvolt met certain construction targets, rejected a request for £30 million to ease the company’s cash-flow problems.

The former employee tells WIRED that making big promises, without necessarily being able to deliver on them, “was ingrained in the ethos of the company from the start.”

“Everything was about image rather than actual progress,” the former employee says. The company’s business plan was “build it and they will come.”

Even as it talked up its potential, the company was failing to book deals and build a sustainable supply chain. “I don’t know whether any prototypes were delivered to the likes of Aston Martin and Lotus,” says Bailey. “Britishvolt’s argument was it had great new technology and it would win customers. So far it hasn’t.”

The company sometimes acted like it was flush with cash. Britishvolt leased a £2.8 million mansion for executives to stay at while they visited the northern premises; the two founders, before they left the company, used to fly to and from the firm’s buildings via private jet. The Guardian reported that staff were given access to video-based yoga classes from a Dubai-based fitness instructor.

When they began working at Britishvolt, all of the company’s office-based staff were provided with 35-inch LG monitors and docks, which, combined, retail at nearly £900. “The spending on unnecessary things was far too high,” the former employee says, recalling that he was “very surprised” when the IT equipment arrived on his desk.

“I just think spending got out of hand,” he says. “The business got carried away with acting like a huge company, when in reality it was a startup that was not making money, and hemorrhaging money on wages. Really, it should have been more focused on generating some form of revenue or customer base before growing at the rate it did.”