27 Jan 2023 09.58 EST UK for sale: how the wealthy hold British property via offshore firms Exclusive: New register shines light on how businessmen, Gulf royals and states such as China have spent billions through offshore jurisdictions. The BBC chair, Richard Sharp, more than 20 Conservative donors, a string of billionaire businessmen and the Formula One driver Lewis Hamilton are among those who have declared they own UK property through offshore jurisdictions, a Guardian investigation has found. The declarations are made on the UK government’s new register of overseas entities, brought in to increase transparency and help the tax authorities by showing the ultimate owners of British property held offshore. It shines a light on how wealthy businessmen, Gulf royals and states such as China have legally bought up billions of pounds of mostly London property, often via jurisdictions such as the British Virgin Islands (BVI) and the Channel Islands. UK for sale: how the wealthy hold British property via offshore firms Read more



27 Jan 2023 09.06 EST Paul Ashworth at Capital Economics says the drop in personal spending in the US suggests the recession could have already started. The monthly income and spending figures reveal that, despite the apparent resilience of fourth-quarter GDP growth, the economy was on the precipice of a recession, and may already have fallen off the ledge. Real consumption declined by 0.2% m/m in November and then 0.3% m/m in December; both declines were worse than we were expecting. As a result, even if real consumption returns to growth over the first few months of this year, the disastrous end to the previous quarter means that first-quarter real consumption growth will be close to zero. Our forecast for first-quarter GDP growth is now -1.5% annualised. Admittedly, as a result of the slump in consumption, the saving rate rebounded to 3.4%, from 2.9%, but personal incomes increased by only 0.2% m/m, which was the smallest gain for eight months. Slowing employment growth and falling hours worked mean that compensation increased by a more modest 0.3% m/m. There will be a bump to incomes in January, as the social security annual cost-of-living adjustment is nearly 9% this year. But that won’t matter much if, as we expect, employment growth slows sharply, putting more downward pressure on labour compensation.



27 Jan 2023 09.04 EST US PCE inflation slows, personal spending falls More evidence of slowing US inflation: data just out shows that the Personal Consumption Expenditures (PCE) price index rose at an annual rate of 5% in December, the lowest since September 2021. Inflation measured by the core index was 4.4%, bang in line with analysts’ forecasts. Personal spending fell 0.2% in December from November. More evidence of a decline in the US Inflation Rate...



The PCE Price Index moved down to 5%, its lowest level since September 2021. Peak was 7% in June 2022. pic.twitter.com/Yfz8ZfLCrY — Charlie Bilello (@charliebilello) January 27, 2023 Paul Ashworth, chief North America economist at Capital Economics, said: Core PCE inflation fell to 4.4%, from 4.7%, and the three-month annualised rate dropped to 2.9%. The latter is still higher than the Fed’s 2% target but was nevertheless a near two-year low. With higher interest rates evidently weighing heavily on demand now, we expect core inflation to continue moderating this year, which will eventually persuade the Fed to begin cutting interest rates late this year.



27 Jan 2023 08.48 EST Here is our full story on HS2: The chancellor, Jeremy Hunt, has moved to quash speculation that HS2 trains would not run to central London, saying he did not see “any conceivable circumstances” in which the planned Euston terminus would not go ahead. It had been reported that the high-speed rail network could instead terminate permanently in the western suburbs of the capital, stopping short of central London to save money. Nevertheless, Hunt told BBC News, when asked if ministers were committed to HS2 going “all the way to Euston”: “Yes we are. And I don’t see any conceivable circumstances in which that would not end up at Euston.” Hunt said he had “prioritised HS2 in the autumn statement”. He added: “We have not got a good record in this country of delivering complex, expensive infrastructure quickly but I’m incredibly proud that, for the first time in this last decade, under a Conservative government, we have shovels in the ground building HS2 and we’re going to make it happen.” His words were later echoed by Downing Street’s official spokesperson. No 10 also played down fears of delay, saying that the planned phases of construction “remain the expected delivery dates”. HS2 officials were reportedly considering scaling back the multibillion-pound project by delaying to 2038 – or scrapping completely – the Euston terminus, according to the Sun. HS2 will run to central London, Jeremy Hunt says Read more



27 Jan 2023 08.45 EST The Federation of Small Businesses has responded more positively to Jeremy Hunt’s speech today. Its chief of external affairs Craig Beaumont said: The contents of the chancellor’s speech today had all the right elements to build a successful, prosperous economy – but now the proof will be in the pudding in the years ahead. His personal drive is clear. It was helpful to speak to the chancellor after the speech on how to take this forward. As a former small business owner himself, it was encouraging to hear him talk about his own, personal experiences with enterprise and innovation. But policy decisions now must match his new four-pillar framework. We’ve got to boost growth and productivity. First up must be to change the recent decisions to gut the SME R&D scheme due to too much take-up, where we need a new way forward. The abolition of Help to Grow Digital due to too little take-up means we need new ideas - such as our Help to Green proposals that boost investment and net zero. The government must now turn its efforts into getting more people into employment through a kickstart scheme. It should also set a target to grow the number of disabled entrepreneurs by 100,000 by 2025, because a disability entrepreneurship gap exists, and the Government should act to help close it. The self-employed should also be given the right help to expand their business. The litmus test of today’s framework and the policy decisions that now flow will be on the chancellor’s budget on March 15, when we hope he follows today’s bark with a bite.



27 Jan 2023 07.57 EST Unite, Britain’s biggest union, said the following facts are at odds with Jeremy Hunt’s vision for a UK economy that can become a hi-tech world leader. According to official statistics car production in the UK is at its lowest level since 1956. What is left of Britain’s steel industry is on the brink of collapse after years of sell offs and in the next year, household incomes are forecast to fall by 4.5% – the greatest slump since the 1950s. Unite General Secretary Sharon Graham said: Jeremy Hunt’s ‘With one leap Jack was free’ economics are fanciful and will not work. Tax cuts for profiteering billionaires won’t reverse the national pay cut, save the NHS, revive British industry or avoid Austerity mk 2. This government urgently needs to make different choices. Those who gain most must pay most.



27 Jan 2023 07.53 EST Kalyeena Makortoff The chancellor made no secret of the government’s hopes of attracting more tech talent to the UK this morning. Jeremy Hunt used his speech to issue a plea to leading tech firms – including Meta, Microsoft, Amazon, Apple and Google – asking them to commit to investing and growing in the UK in hopes of developing the “world’s next Silicon Valley”. He also singled out banking and payment apps Monzo and Revolut as “shining examples” of the UK’s “world-beating fintech sector” and said that in exchange for local investment, they could expect support from both the City and government. If anyone is thinking of starting or investing in an innovation or technology-centred business, I want them to do it here [in the UK]... If you do, we will put at your service not just British ingenuity - but British universities to fuel your innovation, Britain’s financial sector to fund it and a British government that will back you to the hilt. That will be welcome news to bosses like the co-founder and chief executive of Revolut, Nik Storonsky, who met Hunt for the first time on the sidelines of the event. Jeremy Hunt and Revolut CEO Nik Storonsky Photograph: Revolut Storonsky, who is trying to secure a banking license in the UK, also got some facetime with business secretary Grant Shapps who was holding a roundtable with venture capital and global tech CEOs on helping firms ‘Start Up and Scale Up’.

Updated at 08.00 EST

27 Jan 2023 06.56 EST Hunt: Tax cuts will only come 'when the time is right' and be matched by 'spending restraint' Jeremy Hunt has signalled tax cuts will only come “when the time is right” and be matched by “spending restraint”, as he sought to temper restive Conservative backbenchers’ expectations ahead of the budget in March. However, the chancellor hoped to inject what he said was much-needed optimism about the country’s future, saying he wanted Britain to “have nothing less than the most competitive tax regime of any major country”. He has finally publicly stated that he has never paid a tax penalty, when asked by BBC News – the third time he has been asked that question today. I don’t normally comment about my own tax records. But, I am chancellor, so, for the record: I haven’t paid a HMRC fine. Jeremy Hunt says tax cuts will only come ‘when the time is right’ Read more



27 Jan 2023 06.40 EST Jeremy Hunt says ministers committed to HS2 running 'all the way to Euston' Back to HS2. Jeremy Hunt has now said that ministers are committed to HS2 going through to central London. In an interview he said did not see “any conceivable circumstances” in which HS2 would not run to its planned Euston terminus, following reports that because of cost cutting measures, the north-south railway route could terminate to the west of London. Asked by BBC News after his Bloomberg speech whether ministers were committed to HS2 going “all the way to Euston”, said: Yes we are. And I don’t see any conceivable circumstances in which that would not end up at Euston. And indeed I prioritised HS2 in the autumn statement. We have not got a good record in this country of delivering complex, expensive infrastructure quickly, but I’m incredibly proud that, for the first time in this last decade, under a Conservative government, we have shovels in the ground building HS2 and we’re going to make it happen.



27 Jan 2023 06.33 EST Nadhim Zahawi, the beleaguered former chancellor and current chair of the Conservative party, is under pressure to reveal the source of about £30m of unsecured loans made to his wife’s UK property company. The loans were used to finance parts of a large UK property portfolio, reported last year as worth about £100m, and were declared in company accounts which span a period from 2017 to 2021 but give no information about who the lenders are. The calls for greater transparency are the latest request for the former chancellor to explain how his family’s fortune has been managed, after he became embroiled in a mounting controversy over his tax affairs that prompted the government to launch an ethics investigation. Nadhim Zahawi faces questions over source of £30m unsecured loans to wife’s property company Read more



27 Jan 2023 06.20 EST Costcutter owner Bestway takes near £200m stake in Sainsbury’s Bestway, the owner of the Costcutter chain, has taken a near £200m stake in Sainsbury’s and said it could seek to increase its stake further. The privately owned Bestway, which is one of the UK’s largest grocery wholesalers and also owns the country’s third-largest pharmacy chain and more than 2,700 convenience stores under the Costcutter and Best-one brands, has bought almost 81m shares, giving it a 3.45% stake in the UK’s second-largest supermarket chain. “Bestway Group intends to hold its shares in Sainsbury’s for investment purposes and looks forward to supporting the executive management team,” the company said. “Bestway Group may look to make further market purchases of Sainsbury’s shares from time to time, subject to availability and price.” Costcutter owner Bestway takes near £200m stake in Sainsbury’s Read more A Sainsbury's home delivery van in Windsor. Photograph: Maureen McLean/REX/Shutterstock



27 Jan 2023 05.59 EST Rachel Reeves, Labour’s shadow chancellor, has responded to Jeremy Hunt’s speech this morning. She said: Britain has so much potential. From creating good, new jobs in the industries of the future, to making our country the best place to start and grow a business, Labour’s proper plan for growth will grasp those opportunities and make our economy stronger to face up to the challenges. 13 years of Tory economic failure have left living standards and growth on the floor, crashed our economy, and driven up mortgages and bills. The Tories have no plan for now, and no plan for the future. It’s time for a Labour government that will build a better Britain. Labour party leader Sir Keir Starmer and Rachel Reeves, shadow chancellor of the Exchequer, are shown a heat pump demonstrator by Octopus Energy CEO and founder Greg Jackson. Photograph: Jonathan Brady/PA



27 Jan 2023 05.57 EST Phillip Inman At the Bloomberg event, during the Q&A session Jeremy Hunt also reiterated his commitment to the HS2 rail project, without commenting specifically on whether HS2 will run all the way through to London Euston. He said: HS2 was a specific priority for me in the autumn statement. It is a source of national embarrassment that the Japanese opened their first high speed line between Tokyo ands Osaka in 1964, two years before I was born. And I am incredibly proud that under a Conservative government, for the first time, we have shovels in the ground for the London to Birmingham part of HS2. We are absolutely committed to showing we can deliver big important infrastructure projects. By the way I think they are incredibly important for levelling up.

Updated at 06.15 EST