We are starting to see what Fiji politics is likely to look like under the new government elected in December 2022.

One thing is clear: the Republic of Fiji Military Forces (RFMF) is reluctant to disappear from the political scene and does not want to relinquish the advantages it gained under the post-2006 coup military-backed government that was defeated at the polls a month ago.

On Tuesday, Maj Gen Jone Kalouniwai, the RFMF commander, issued a statement critical of the “ambition” and “sweeping changes” initiated by the new government. In particular, Kalouniwai warned against undermining the 2013 constitution, which declares the military to be a “guardian” of Fijian democracy and gives “overall responsibility” to the military “to ensure at all times the security, defence and wellbeing of Fiji and all Fijians”.

Prime minister Sitiveni Rabuka told reporters on Wednesday that Kalouniwai’s public warning was “a one off statement that has been dealt with”, after talks between the military chief and home affairs minister Pio Tikoduadua.

Kalouniwai’s statement was likely triggered by several developments. The new attorney-general, Sirome Turaga, has indicated cabinet’s intention to discuss a review of the 2013 constitution. In reality, changing the constitution is virtually impossible, any amendment requires the support of 75% of MPs and also 75% of registered voters in a referendum.

Second, there has been much talk over recent days of the release of George Speight and those other few 2000 coup-plotters who remain behind bars. The coup led by Speight brought havoc to the country, but was ultimately defeated by Fiji’s military and that victory is, symbolically, how the RFMF has defined itself ever since.

Third, the commander’s statement focuses on “the separation of powers between the executive and the judicial arms of the state”, leading to speculation that moves may be afoot behind the scenes to make changes to parts of the judiciary.

Such changes are necessary. Many of the judges are from Sri Lanka, and have been employed on short-term contracts, which critics have said could make them more susceptible to political influence.

There have been some disgraceful judgments, such as the conviction of lawyer Richard Naidu merely for pointing out a spelling error in one judge’s ruling (confusing the words “injection” and “injunction”).

On the other hand, Kalouniwai’s statement implies some departures from the position taken by former prime minister Frank Bainimarama. First, his interview offered some acknowledgment that the former government had overstepped the mark on the separation of powers by interfering in the operations of the judiciary.

Second, the fact that he offered the interview to Vijay Narayan at Fiji Village, rather than the Fiji Broadcasting Corporation (FBC) is a significant change. Both Bainimarama and the former attorney-general Sayed-Khaiyum regularly and vigorously denounced Fiji Village, an independent news outlet, for being in league with the opposition, and greatly favoured the FBC and Fiji Sun with hefty government bailouts and extensive income flows from government advertising.

In the run up to the December 2022 election, Kalouniwai made several public comments promising to uphold the election result, and to follow the rule of law. Although the police commissioner called out the troops after the defeat of Bainimarama’s FijiFirst party, and the Commander obliged, it was not a major deployment and the Commander rejected the police commissioner’s claims of a major threat to political stability and Kalouniwai gave no endorsement to the claims, made by Bainimarama, that Indo-Fijian homes and businesses had been attacked, as a result of his election loss. Those allegations of unrest were broadly denounced across all communities in Fiji.

Amid all the recent plaudits for Kalouniwai many have forgotten his former statements, which zealously guarded the RFMF’s right to play a “guardian” role in Fiji’s politics. In 2017, Pio Tikoduadua, who is now home affairs minister, told a party rally that “the Indo-Fijian communities should no longer be duped into believing that their security is only guaranteed by a Bainimarama in power” and that “security lies in the goodwill of all communities”. For Kalouniwai, that was unacceptable, claiming that such a comment impinged on the military’s constitutional role to safeguard democracy.

Yesterday’s statement was a warning to the new government to tread gently in its reforms. It was rightly criticised by Tikoduadua, who has refused to submit to such pressures. The commander has indicated that he is willing to play ball with the new government, but he needs to realise that the RFMF’s guardian role, which was only obtained as a result of the 1987 and 2006 coups, cannot for ever be imposed on his country’s elected governments.

Jon Fraenkel is a Professor of Comparative Politics at Victoria University of Wellington.