Wow, this story is horrible. It starts out innocuously enough with some boardroom shenanigans:

In September 2021, an official in Michigan State University’s athletic department sent an email to his boss with exciting news: An online betting company was willing to pay handsomely for the right to promote gambling at the university. “Alan, if we are willing to take an aggressive position, we have a $1 M/year deal on the table with Caesar’s,” Paul Schager wrote to Alan Haller, the university’s athletic director. . . . Unlike public universities, which are subject to government disclosure rules and freedom of information requests, the sports-marketing companies are privately held. That means the terms of the deals they strike don’t have to be publicly disclosed if the universities are not a party to the contracts.

Hey, don’t they know it’s “Caesars,” not “Caesar’s”? A bunch of ignoramuses there, is what we’ve got. In any case, can’t they just follow the path of their Big Ten rivals at Ohio State and get their ill-gotten gains via government grants for fraudulent research?

But, hey, it’s cool, all explained in Newspeak for you right here:

Mr. Schager, executive associate athletic director at Michigan State, described this benefit of the system. “With the multimedia rights holder, public institutions like Michigan State no longer have to disclose all those sponsorship deals,” he said in an interview. “This helps with the sponsors being able to spend what they feel is appropriate without having the public or employees or stockholders question that investment.”

The Michigan State athletic department . . . What could possibly go wrong?

But then there’s this:

Some aspects of the deals also appear to violate the gambling industry’s own rules against marketing to underage people. The “Responsible Marketing Code” published by the American Gaming Association, the umbrella group for the industry, says sports betting should not be advertised on college campuses.

And this:

The University of Maryland, for example, has a partnership with the sports-gambling platform PointsBet. A university website links to a PointsBet page that entices new customers this way: “Get your first bets risk free up to $2000 + $100 in free bets.” The pitch means that if you lose your initial $2,000, PointsBet will let you make another $2,000 worth of complimentary bets. . . .

The University of Maryland! I was gonna say that they haven’t had any major scandal since 1986, but then just to check I googled *university of maryland athletic department scandal* and . . . yes, they’ve had major scandals since then.

And this doozy:

Cody Worsham, L.S.U.’s associate athletic director and chief brand officer, said in a statement that Caesars and the university “share a commitment to responsible, age-appropriate marketing.” That commitment, Mr. Worsham added, “is integral to a sustainable and responsible partnership benefiting our entire department, university, and fan base.” . . . At L.S.U., Caesars promotions downplay the risk of losing. In an email, gamblers were told they could bet “on all the sports you love right from the palm of your hand, and every bet earns more with Caesars Rewards — win or lose.”

LSU, huh? I guess they have some need of a “chief brand officer.”

This one’s pretty good too:

In 2020, Texas Christian University, in Fort Worth, joined WinStar World Casino and Resort to open a new club with suites and premium seating.

I haven’t kept up on which religions currently allow drinking, betting, and dancing. What next, rock ‘n’ roll?

I can’t wait till Columbia gets its own sports betting contract. It’s been a few years since Columbia’s been to a bowl game or the NCAA tournament, but we could always bet on movements in our U.S. News ranking or things like that. No possibilities for insider trading there, right??

P.S. That all said, I’m a Michigan football fan. Not a lot—I don’t really follow college sports at all—but a little, partly because my sister teaches at the University of Michigan and partly because my dad hated Woody Hayes. And I enjoy betting on sports from time to time. Betting is fun, in moderation. The thing that bugs me about these gambling companies is that their business model seems to be based on getting addicts to gamble more. As I wrote a few years ago, as a statistician I am pretty disgusted about articles that celebrate the use of statistics to rip people off. This might be the same way that, if I were a programmer, I’d dislike articles that glamorize the hackers who scam people out of their passwords. Yes, statistics can be used for all sorts of bad ends and this should be vigorously reported. But not celebrated.