Several political leaders, including Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Congress leader Rahul Gandhi, on Saturday greeted people of three northeast states —Tripura, Manipur and Meghalaya — on their statehood day.

Wishing the people of these three states a “bright future”, President Droupadi Murmu on Saturday tweeted, “The rich culture, natural beauty and abiding traditions of these states enrich our diversity. The people of these states are known for their talent and spontaneity.”

Greetings on the statehood day of Manipur, Meghalaya and Tripura. The rich culture, natural beauty and abiding traditions of these states enrich our diversity. The people of these states are known for their talent and spontaneity. I wish a very bright future to all of them. — President of India (@rashtrapatibhvn) January 21, 2023

Both Tripura and Manipur have seen progress and growth in the last few years, PM Modi said, adding that people from Meghalaya have excelled in diverse fields.

Greetings to the people of Meghalaya on their Statehood Day. This state is known for its vibrant culture, particularly music, art and passion towards sports. People from Meghalaya have excelled in diverse fields. I pray for Meghalaya’s continuous progress in the years to come. — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) January 21, 2023

Congress leader Rahul Gandhi said that the “rich history and vibrant culture” of these three states are “the pride of India”

Best wishes to the people of Manipur, Meghalaya and Tripura on their respective statehood day. Their rich history and vibrant culture are the pride of India, which we must cherish and nurture. — Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) January 21, 2023

Meanwhile, Union Home Minister Amit Shah highlighted the contributions made by the people of Manipur to the realms of sports, arts and the armed forces. In another tweet, he lauded Meghalaya for making “its mark in good governance in recent times”.

Greetings to the people of Meghalaya on their statehood day. While Meghalaya attracts global tourists with its stunning landscape, it has also made its mark in good governance in recent times. I pray for the continued progress and prosperity of Meghalaya. pic.twitter.com/X9e9EScTcI — Amit Shah (@AmitShah) January 21, 2023



“Tripura is undergoing all-round development under the guidance of honourable PM Narendra Modi and leadership of Chief Minister Manik Saha,” tweeted BJP National President JP Nadda.

Union Minister Harshdeep Singh Puri and Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan also extended their greetings to the people of the three northeastern states.