The majority of Americans don’t want to see politics at Sunday’s Super Bowl.

Polling shows 84% of likely voters said Super Bowl LVII is no place for political demonstrations, according to a Convention of States Action/Trafalgar Group survey. Only 10% of those interviewed said they want to see political or cultural statements in the game’s coverage.

“Sporting events in America have always been a place where Americans could come together and celebrate inspirational moments and find unity, such as 1984 USA men’s hockey team victory, or the singing of the national anthem in Yankee Stadium after the attacks on 9/11,” Mark Meckler, president of Convention of States, said.

“But the radical Left’s obsession with making all aspects of American life subservient to their politics has found its way into our national pastimes, as they find new ways to divide us from our neighbors,” he said.

“The good news is the American people have had enough and are showing that they are ready to move past this obsession with woke politics and the stain it put on our nation,” Meckler continued.

The polling follows years of Americans growing weary of athletes politicizing sporting events. In 2019, women’s soccer player Megan Rapinoe turned down an invitation from President Donald Trump to visit the White House. NFL player Colin Kaepernick started kneeling at NFL games during the national anthem to protest police brutality in 2016.

Lia Thomas, a biological male, competed on the University of Pennsylvania men’s swim team for three years before making headlines by identifying as female and transitioning to the women’s team in 2022.

Americans across the political spectrum are united in their distaste for political displays in sporting events. Approximately 80% of independent voters, 76% of Democratic voters, and 93% of Republican voters surveyed said they want athletes and media to “focus on the game.”

Convention of States/Trafalgar Group conducted the survey of more than 1,000 likely voters between Feb. 2 and Feb. 5. Close to 6% of those surveyed said they weren’t sure about the appropriate intersection of politics and sports.

Have an opinion about this article? To sound off, please email letters@DailySignal.com and we’ll consider publishing your edited remarks in our regular “We Hear You” feature. Remember to include the url or headline of the article plus your name and town and/or state.