The Athletic has live coverage of the Bengals vs Chiefs in the AFC Championship game.

Last season’s AFC championship was a classic: The Chiefs raced out to a 21-3 lead behind three Patrick Mahomes touchdown passes, only for Joe Burrow and Bengals to storm back, force overtime and win it on an Evan McPherson field goal. That dramatic comeback was Cincinnati’s second of three consecutive wins over Kansas City since the start of the 2021 season, including a 27-24 victory in Week 13 this year.

Advertisement

Can the Bengals do it again? How can the Chiefs stop that streak and head to their third Super Bowl in four seasons?

Two key factors to watch when each team is on offense (all stats via TruMedia unless otherwise noted):

When Cincinnati has the ball

1. Do we see more of Joe Burrow, the runner?

Not only has Burrow gotten better at getting rid of the ball (his average time to throw has dropped from 2.57 seconds in 2021 to 2.40 seconds in 2022) and avoiding sacks (his sack percentage has dipped to 2.6), he’s also been far more devastating as a runner and scrambler.

GO DEEPER How the Bengals took offense every step of the way back to the AFC Championship Game

The Bengals’ quarterback had nine rushes of 10-plus yards during the regular season, compared to a grand total of one last year. He looked to scramble more (27 attempts this season, up from 21 in ’21) and was a more effective runner when he decided to call his own number, with six of his 10 third-down scrambles going for first downs.

Burrow also has been used more on designed rushes — not just QB sneaks (which Burrow is quite good at), but actual, bona fide run plays dialed up for him. He ranked third in rushing success rate among quarterbacks with 15 or more such attempts (including sneaks). He even posted a rushing touchdown in Cincinnati’s Week 13 win over the Chiefs.

The Chiefs’ defense ranks 22nd in total EPA allowed on quarterback scrambles, but it fares much better against designed runs. Can the Kansas City defenders maintain their pass-rush lanes, keep Burrow in the pocket and avoid one of those backbreaking third-down scrambles?

GO DEEPER Four lessons the Chiefs have learned in their 3 previous losses to the Bengals

2. How much heat is just right for Steve Spagnuolo?

At some point on Sunday, Chiefs defensive coordinator Steve Spagnuolo is going to bring the ruckus. While the Chiefs sit around the middle of the pack in blitz rate this season, there will inevitably be some form of pressure from the red and white.

Advertisement

In Burrow’s three starts against Kansas City since the start of the 2021 season, the Chiefs have blitzed him an average of eight times per game. Exactly half of those pressure attempts have resulted in a successful play for the Bengals, including eight first-down throws from Burrow. But those are rates that most defenses can live with, especially if they’re sending extra bodies toward the quarterback.

One teensy problem is that a few of those gains were devastating for the Chiefs’ defense, like when Cincinnati picked up chunks of 35 and 30 yards against blitzes during the fourth quarter of a Week 17 battle in 2021. That 30-yard gain, a Burrow-to-Ja’Marr Chase completion, came on third-and-27 and extended the Bengals’ game-winning (and game-ending) drive.

266 yards on the DEY for Ja'Marr. That's a team record for receiving yards in a game. Watch on CBS pic.twitter.com/s7clFfPQEY — Cincinnati Bengals (@Bengals) January 2, 2022

While Burrow is still willing and able to launch throws downfield to Chase and Tee Higgins and torch defenses that are trying to heat him up, his overall numbers are down against the blitz. At the risk of tossing around the dreaded “regression” word, Burrow slipped from his 2021 mark of .29 EPA per dropback against five or more pass rushers (which ranked sixth among all eligible QBs) to .06 in 2022. His success rate dropped nearly seven percentage points.

One possible explanation for those dips is that Burrow has more often lost his running back in protection. In 2022, as defenses have dropped deep into coverage to try to take away the Bengals’ upper-echelon skill position talent, Burrow has traded hunting explosive passes for channeling his inner Philip Rivers and checking the ball down. He has thrown to his running backs at a rate nearly 5 percent higher in 2022 (21.9) than he did in 2021 (17.3).

GO DEEPER How the Bengals schemed Ja'Marr Chase to fluster the Bills

Despite injuries, the Bengals’ offensive line under Frank Pollack is still a disciplined unit in both the run game and pass protection. That soundness up front has a trickle-down effect of allowing the Bengals’ running backs to get out on routes. Since the offensive line takes away any possible blitzers, Joe Mixon and Samaje Perine are able to leak out into their given route assignments, instead of hanging back and blocking.

Advertisement

But exotic pressures from Spagnuolo could force the Bengals to keep their backs in the backfield and push Cincinnati out of the preferred, efficiency-laden playstyle it’s grown accustomed to since an offensive revamp in Week 5. If that happens, Burrow would have to go back to his more explosive (and higher variance) vertical play style of 2021.

Even comparing Burrow’s target map against four pass rushers to what he does vs. the blitz illustrates the coin-flip results of throwing go balls to the outside (notice the blue dots, which are incompletions):

And against the blitz:

The Chiefs will try whatever they can to slow down this Cincinnati offense, which loves to bloody opponents’ noses — just as it did in Buffalo last week — with repeated jabs, before Burrow lands that devastating uppercut to Chase or Higgins (or Tyler Boyd, Hayden Hurst or even Trenton Irwin).

When Kansas City has the ball

1. What, exactly, does Lou Anarumo lean into on passing downs?

Bengals defensive coordinator Lou Anarumo loves to adjust his game plans week to week, like an aspiring chef changing the menu of their kitchen based on the customers visiting. In Anarumo’s case, those “customers” are the opposing quarterbacks.

The main coverage Cincinnati plays, its preferred blitzes, its rotations — it all gets tweaked, to great effect, by Anarumo in order to stifle offenses.

On a handful of snaps in the divisional round against the Bills, the Bengals brought simulated pressure, which is when a defense uses an off-ball player (such as a DB) as part of its pass rush but drops a defensive lineman into coverage and still brings just four total pass rushers. That’s on top of the eight true blitzes Anarumo dialed up last Sunday.

One of those simulated pressures came on the final play of the first quarter and resulted in a sack by safety Vonn Bell, who took advantage of the pass-protection inexperience of Bills rookie running back James Cook:

By changing the angles of attack for their pass rush and coverage defenders, the Bengals seemed to have the Bills offensive linemen, running backs and QB Josh Allen’s heads spinning for 60 minutes of a frustrating playoff performance.

Advertisement

The simulated pressures make sense against a Bills offensive line (and Allen’s eyes) that can be charitably described as “shaky.”

In three previous matchups against the Chiefs since 2021, though, Anarumo has preferred to bring five or more pass rushers when he’s mixed things up against Mahomes. He’s always turned the knobs of just how much blitzing he’s wanted to throw in there, specifically on third and fourth down, like a music producer trying to find that perfect mix.

It makes sense that Anarumo prefers to blitz Kansas City, rather than try to poke and prod with simulated pressures. The Chiefs’ offensive line is one of the better units in the league when it comes to sorting out pressures (and to pass protection, in general). With consistency, that front has been able to discern blitzers and allow the Chiefs’ running backs to his release on their routes — remember, we just talked about this exact factor on the other side of the ball.

GO DEEPER How Patrick Mahomes' ankle injury could impact Chiefs' game plan vs. Bengals

The Bengals blitzed the Chiefs six times during their Week 13 matchup. Throwing out one blitz snap that came in a goal-line situation out of heavy personnel, the other five all happened on third or fourth downs, making for the highest rate from the Bengals’ defense since the beginning of the 2021 season. It was a change in tendency from the combined two blitzes that the Bengals brought in non-goal-line, third- and fourth-down situations during their matchups with the Chiefs last season.

And the Bengals had success back in December. Well, early on, at least. After two third-down incompletions to start, Mahomes completed his next three passes against the blitz for three first downs. He had a gain of 5 yards on fourth-and-4 plus two big completions to Marquez Valdes-Scantling in third-and-long situations — Valdes-Scantling picked up 42 and 29 yards, respectively, against Cover-0 pressures (six rushers with man coverage across the board elsewhere).

Anarumo dared to play with fire last time out against Mahomes and wound up getting burned in the second half.

The other changeup Anarumo has in his arsenal of defensive calls, however, is to use three pass rushers and drop eight into coverage. It’s something that flummoxed Mahomes and the Kansas City offense during the 2021 AFC championship, when the Bengals dropped eight defenders on Mahomes dropbacks a whopping 18 times — easily the highest mark for the Bengals since 2021 and just the second time they’ve dropped eight more than 10 times over the same time span.

GO DEEPER Chad Henne-led 98-yard drive a prime example why Chiefs are so confident in backup QB

That’s also the type of play call that could make sense given that Mahomes is dealing with a high ankle sprain, which likely will limit his ability to ad-lib. Putting all of those bodies and arms in the passing lanes underneath could force Mahomes to look to attack down the field, something he also might not be able to do with as much explosiveness if that injury forces him to throw with more of his upper body.

Advertisement

The last time the Bengals dropped eight into coverage against the Chiefs in Week 13 was one of the best poker moves from any NFL defensive coordinator this season. While the Bengals showed pressure like they had all day, they then flooded the passing lanes and landed a sack with only three pass rushers, a sequence I broke down on my Wind The Clock YouTube series.

2. How heavy do the Chiefs go?

The 2021 AFC championship forced a metamorphosis within this Chiefs offense, which started with sending Tyreek Hill off to South Beach and included an uptick in heavier personnel groupings and an emphasis on the run game. It’s not just how often the Chiefs run, but what they run: more under center, more plays with receivers blocking on run-pass option plays (they still run routes on those, just not as much).

The Chiefs have used less 11 personnel (one RB, one TE, three WRs) in 2022 — they’ve been in that alignment on 56 percent of snaps in 2022; it was 67 percent in 2021 (including the playoffs for both seasons).

The Chiefs have supplemented those snaps by using their assortment of tight ends more often, going to 12 personnel (one RB, two TEs, two WRs) at a 9-percent higher rate in 2022 and using 13 personnel (one RB, three TEs, 1 WR) on 39 more snaps. With defenses (including the Bengals’ defense) treating Travis Kelce like he’s a wide receiver when the Chiefs use two tight ends, that 13 personnel has been a way for the Chiefs to force defenses to play with more linebackers on the field. They’ve steamrolled those that don’t.

The Chiefs have been devastating out of 13 personnel this season, posting the highest offensive success rate of any team in the NFL (53.6 percent). Eleven of the Chiefs’ 62 dropbacks from that grouping have gone for an explosive play — their 20.8 percent explosive pass rate would be better than the Dolphins’ overall league-leading mark of 18.7.

GO DEEPER Ranking the NFL head coach openings, a Super Bowl pick and more: Sando's Pick Six

In the Week 13 meeting with Cincinnati, the Chiefs used 13 personnel on seven snaps, up from three combined attempts during the two ’21 matchups. They ripped off three first downs and two gains of 15 yards from those looks. That’s in addition to the Chiefs’ success running the ball against the Bengals over the past three meetings — three of the four highest single-game rushing success rates allowed by the Bengals since the start of the 2021 season have come vs. Kansas City.

Perhaps we see Andy Reid use tight ends Noah Gray and Blake Bell, alongside Kelce, thereby making Anarumo pick his poison between giving up another 5-yard gain (and potentially losing control on the ground) or daring to see how much magic dust Mahomes has left.

(Illustration: Eamonn Dalton / The Athletic;

photos: Cooper Neill, David Eulitt / Getty Images)