Bluechip App Review

Bluechip apk is a fairly new online casino and betting facility in India, which began operating in 2021, the betting company offers a wide range of casino games with live dealers, online sports betting, betting on television programs and lottery games, and also offers more than 6000 thousand games on which everyone can bet.

The site was launched in 2021 by XZ Solutions B.V., an online gambling company with a Curacao license. Bluechip has enormous popularity because the platform covers cryptocurrencies and bitcoins, which significantly whitens the lives of its users. The betting company offers its customers numerous bonuses and promotions that every registered user can use and place a bet at a pleasant coefficient and through the most popular ways of withdrawing and replenishing their cash, which are available to Indian users.

The Bluechip application is available for download among Android and iOS users, which greatly facilitates the task and you do not have to use the mobile version of the site or computer to stay up to date.

If we consider the design of the application in more detail, then we can highlight its characteristic features, for example, that the application is made in dark blue with a hint of white, which looks laconically and appropriately, because these colors are in harmony with each other.

If you look a little to the right, you will notice a pop-up menu in the form of three white stripes, and it is there that when you click, you will notice the various categories of bets offered by the application. There are also buttons for your personal account and currency selection, as well as a registration button if you don’t have a personal account yet.

If you pay attention to the lower buttons directly inside the application itself, you will be able to notice the buttons of popular sports events that can be accessed in real time right now, which are in demand among the residents of India, these can be the following sporting events:

Soccer.

Cricket.

Tennis.

eSports.

Baseball.

Basketball.

Table Tennis.

It is also worth noting that these sports events are relevant and popular, but you can find more by clicking on this tab.

Soccer. This sport is as common as cricket for residents of India and it is Bluechip that offers a huge selection of bets on this event, which includes:

Portuguese Primeira Liga.

European Championship.

Spanish LaLiga.

German Bundesliga.

You can also find other football betting modes here, pay special attention before choosing a team. It is here that you can also view the standings.

eSports. Due to the fact that this direction has been developed not so long ago, Bluechip also offers esport betting for all ages, among which you can find the most popular games:

Rocket League.

Dota 2.

Counter-Strike.

NBA 2K.

Do not be afraid to place bets and take risks, because this may be your chance for luck.

Cricket. This sport is one of the two most popular, so it is here that the choice for a bet is really good, you can bet on the winner, serve or just draw. Here you can even choose between a variety of game props. It is here that you can also watch the game you have placed bets on in real time and see the statistics in real time. The betting odds are nice and there are actual sports events here:

Caribbean Premier League.

World Twenty 20.

Indian Premier League.

IPL.

Hundred Women.

Other teams and bets are also available.

Bluechip India boasts a huge selection of lottery and slots games, as well as TV shows, so it’s worth noting.

Slots. The choice of slots in the mobile application Bluechip is amazing and here you can select more than 3000 slots, you can find such as:

Hand Of Gold.

Joker.

Gold Express.

Sweet Bonanza.

Another choice of slots is also available in the app and on the website.

Lotteries. Lotteries is a game for lucky numbers and it is here that everyone can try their luck on a lucky number, in the Bluechip application you can find such games as:

Halloween Keno.

Super Keno.

GoldRush.

Other lotteries are also available.

How to Download Bluechip

When downloading a mobile application, you should have free time, free space in the device’s memory and a good Internet connection, here you will learn how to install the application on various devices.

Android

In order to successfully download the Bluechip India application to your device, your Android version must be higher than 10.1.1. and if this version is supported by your phone, you can safely download the application from the site.

Find the name of the betting company in the search engine and go to it. Go to the upper right corner and click on the pop-up menu, go to the “download application” button. In your device settings, go to settings if the download has not started yet and allow the installation and download of files from unknown sources. Go back and click “install APK Bluechip India file”. Wait for the download to finish. Open the application icon.

You have successfully downloaded and installed the mobile app.

iOS

Downloading the app to an iPhone is a little more difficult, but you can handle it, because the app is under development and you can take out the frame from a mobile browser and here you will be told how you can do it:

Open your search engine and find a betting company. In the bottom panel of your device, find the share button. Bring the tab to the screen of your device, here you can rename it for your convenience.

Now you can use the tab for your convenience.

How to Register Bluechip India

To register a new account in Bluechip India, you will not need a lot of time and effort, because registration on this betting platform is not particularly difficult and you have to do a lot of simple actions. Follow the simple steps to create an account:

Open the mobile app icon on your phone and find the registration button in the upper right corner. Wait for the new tab to load and you will see a registration form in front of you, which you must fill out. Enter your real name, surname and date of birth (do not forget that you cannot enter false data), your phone number and email address. Agree to the terms of the company by clicking the check mark. Wait for SMS verification of your account and now you can actively use the application and your account.

Good luck and winnings!

Welcome Bonuses

Bluechip India, like other betting companies, offers a wide range of promotions and bonuses for its customers, as well as special packages for both new players and those who have already been registered and also a wide range of VIP packages. Here you will be told about the most popular promotions that you can find.

The Welcome Bonus from Bluechip India is a 4-level deal in which the player who owns the game must deposit the required amount, and the corresponding bonus will be credited to his account within a few seconds.

Combo Boost. Place a bet on a sports event in real time before the match starts, using an express of 5-10 events. Choose offers where the coefficients are equal to or exceed 1.25. If your assumptions turn out to be correct, from 5% to 50% will be added to your winnings.

50% Daily Cricket Cashback. Place a bet on cricket by choosing an event where the coefficient is at least 1.8 and if your balance turns out to be negative at the end of the day, you will be able to receive cashback in the amount of 50% of your expenses. The bonus is available only 24 hours, valid on Fridays and weekends.

A large number of offers will be available in the “bonuses and promotions” tab.

Payment Methods

Make payments through trusted payment systems Bluechip India among which you can find:

Mastercard.

Visa Card.

IMPS.

Bank Transfer.

Binance Wallet.

Tron Wallet.

Binance Coin Wallet.

Jeton.

MuchBetter.

UPI.

Please note that you must be of legal age.

Support

You can contact support 24/7 and there are several methods for how you can get advice from specialists:

Email. You can get help from specialists by this email: support@bluechip.io and by attaching files and documents if any. Live chat. You can get support from consultants in real-time in the application or on the website by selecting the right kiosk and you will be answered within a couple of minutes.

Don’t be afraid to ask for help.

FAQ

Can I ?reate a Second Account to Get the Bonus?

This cannot be done, because only one IP address, mail, phone, or home address can be registered for one account and use one bonus.

Is it safe to play at BlueChip India?

BlueChip is safe to use and has an up-to-date SSL certificate and proper data encryption.