In the finale of this weekend’s NFL postseason action, Dak Prescott and the Dallas Cowboys will head west to battle the San Francisco 49ers and rookie QB Brock Purdy on Sunday Night Football. To add to the excitement, here are the top NFL Divisional Round sports betting promos from legal sportsbooks in the industry, delivering more than $5,000 in max value for new users. Get an edge from the expert game analysis, odds and QB props below.

NFL Playoff Divisional Round Sports Betting Promos: Up to $5,100 in Value

Prescott, Cowboys Looking to Upset 49ers as Divisional Round ‘Dogs

Free Pick’Em Contests! Compete for prizes every day by entering our free betting games. NFL, NBA, college basketball and more!

San Francisco opened as 4.5-point home favorites, but Kyle Shanahan’s team was quickly bet down to -4 on Monday evening. The best spread you’ll find on the 49ers is . Mind you, there’s a bit more vig on that wager, as of Friday afternoon.

They’re riding an 11-game winning streak, but there’s a historical trend going against them. Since 2003, teams on a winning streak of eight or more games have gone 10-23 (30.3%) ATS in the NFL postseason. In most instances, their poor results revolve around an inflated line.

Enter the Cowboys, which generated the second-most EPA per play in the wild-card round. Granted, they blew out a reeling Buccaneers team. In order to at least cover against the Niners, Prescott & Co. will likely need to have success through the air. DeMeco Ryans’ unit boasts the second-rated run defense DVOA (via Football Outsiders).

Caesars Sportsbook Promo Code Playoff Underdog Insurance: How You And The Cowboys Could Win

Get Up to $1,250 in Bet Credits at Caesars Sportsbook 1 Visit Caesars Sportsbook Up to $1,250 On Caesars Caesars Sportsbook Review Stream NFL Games In App For Free + get 1,000 Caesars Reward Credits

+ also get 1,000 Tier Credits Redeem for Bet Credits, Hotel Stays, & More! Use Promo Code: LEGALFULL

PLAY NOW

As mentioned above, if the Dallas want to score the upset, it’ll require an efficient performance from Prescott. Despite showcasing one of the league’s best defenses, San Francisco ranks No. 23 in pass defense DVOA on third down. That’s in part because of Ryans’ reliance on blitzing in those instances.

Demmondore Lenior represents its most vulnerable cornerback in nickel coverage. The second-year defensive back was forced into a bigger role after the team lost both Emmanuel Moseley and Jason Verrett to IR. With CeeDee Lamb moving all over the formation, it could lead to a profitable outing for either Michael Gallup or T.Y. Hilton on the outside against Lenior.

The 49ers’ zone setup should also aid Prescott. He owns the 13th-ranked passer rating against zone looks, as opposed to ranking No. 32 in that department against man coverage.

With the Caesars Sportsbook promo code, the first-bet insurance offer supplies you with a bit of security if things don’t fall together for Cowboys. If your first bet loses, you’ll get a betting credit for the amount of your bet up to $1,250.

Dak Prescott Vs. Brock Purdy: Divisional Round Analysis

Both signal callers led their teams to victory in the wild-card round, and they’ll undoubtedly play critical roles this time around. For starters, Prescott accounted for 305 passing yards and five total touchdowns against the Bucs. Meanwhile, Purdy manufactured 332 yards through the air, along with three passing scores.

Not only is Prescott positioned to outduel Purdy because of the aforementioned areas, but there’s reason to believe that Purdy will underperform market expectations as well. Remember that as you consider how to use your Divisional Round sports betting promos.

Dak Prescott Divisional Round Prop Bet

Since I’m projecting a low-scoring game, I don’t see much value in Prescott overs. However, I’d consider wagering under 0.5 interceptions. The best odds for that prop bet are +120 at DraftKings Sportsbook.

Use your click-to-collect DraftKings promo code bet credit here, and you could walk away with $60 if you bet $50 on this Prescott prop.

Considering Prescott accrued the most regular-season interceptions, this market is being priced accordingly in the playoffs. But his positive outlook against the 49ers’ defensive scheme bodes well for him to avoid making a mistake for a second straight week.

Join our Discord betting channel (under the #roles server) and receive an immediate notification whenever our staff makes a bet.

Brock Purdy NFC Divisional Prop Bet

Purdy certainly ranks highly in the following categories ever since taking over under center in Week 13:

1st in YPA

in YPA 2nd in EPA/play

in EPA/play 3rd in EPA/play on play-action passes

in EPA/play on play-action passes 4th in EPA/play against the blitz

But continuing on with the notion above, Purdy is due for regression for Divisional Round sports betting promos. For one, he’s yet to face a defense of Dallas’ caliber — especially in regards to applying heat on the quarterback. Paced by All-Pro edge rusher Micah Parsons, the Cowboys have tallied the highest pressure rate across the NFL.

The Iowa State product even ranks No. 34 in “danger plays,” accounting for when a QB took an unnecessary risk that could have resulted in a turnover.

In short, Purdy under passing yards appears to be a valuable route.

Beat The Closing Line: NFL Divisional Round Bets